in the previous video we gave a
mathematical definition of gradient
descent let's delve deeper and in this
video get better intuition about what
the algorithm is doing and why the steps
of the gradient descent algorithm might
make sense here's the gradient descent
algorithm that we saw last time and I
just remind you this parameter or this
term alpha is called the learning rate
and it controls how big a step we take
when updating my parameter theta J and
this second term here is the derivative
term and what I want to do in this video
is give you better intuition about when
each of these two terms doing and why
you know when put together this entire
update make sense in order to convey
these intuitions what I want to do is
use a slightly simpler example where we
want to minimize a function of just one
parameter so so we have say we have a
cost function J of just one parameter
theta one like we did you know a few
videos back when theta one is a real
number okay so so just again so we can
have 1d plots which are a little bit
simpler to look at let's try to
understand what gradient descent will do
on this function so let's say here's my
function J of theta 1 and so that's my
and where theta 1 is a real number right
now let's say I've initialized gradient
descent with theta 1 at this location so
imagine that we start off at that point
on my function what gradient descent
will do is it will update theta 1 gets
updated as theta 1 minus alpha times DD
theta one J of theta 1
and as an aside you know this this
derivative term right if you're
wondering why I change the notation from
these partial derivative symbols if you
don't know what the difference is
between these partial derivative symbols
in the DD theta don't worry about it
technically in mathematics we call this
a partial derivative we call this a
derivative depending on the number of
parameters in the function J but that's
a mathematical technicality so you know
for the purpose of this lecture think of
these partial symbols and D D theta one
is exactly the same thing and don't
worry about whether during the
difference is I'm going to try to use
the mathematically precise notation but
for our purposes these two notations are
really the same thing but so let's see
what this this equation will do so we're
going to compute this derivative an
option you've seen derivatives in
calculus before but what a derivative at
this point does is basically saying you
know let's take the tangent to that
point like that straight line there a
line is just touching this dysfunction
and let's look at the slope of this red
line that's what the derivative is it
says what's the slope of line then is
just tangent to the function okay and
the slope of a line of course is just
right now this height divided by this
horizontal thing now this line has a
positive slope so it has a positive
derivative and so my update to theta is
going to be theta one gets updated as
theta one minus alpha times some
positive number okay alpha the learning
rate is always a positive number and so
I'm going to take the one gets updated
as theta one minus something so I'm
going to end up moving theta one to the
left with a decrease a the one and we
can see this is the right thing to do
because I actually want to head in this
direction you know to get me closer to
the minimum over there so gradient
descent so far seems to be doing the
right thing
let's look at another example so let's
take my same function J for the draw the
fungal same function jail
and now let's say I had instead
initialize my parameter over there on
the left so theta one is here I'm going
to at that point on the surface now my
derivative term DD theta one J of theta
one when you validate it at this point
going to look at write the slope of that
line so this derivative term is a slope
of this line but this line is slanting
down so this line has negative slope
right or alternatively I say that this
function has negative derivative just
means negative slope at that point so
this is less than equal to 0 so when I
update theta I'm going to have theta
gets updated as theta minus alpha times
a negative number and so I have theta 1
minus a negative number which means I'm
actually going to increase theta right
because this is minus of a negative
number means I'm adding something to
theta and what that means is that I'm
going to end up increasing theta and so
we'll start here and increase theta
which again seems like the thing I
wanted to do to try to get me closer to
the minimum so this hopefully explains
the intuition behind what the derivative
term is doing let's next take a look at
the learning rate term alpha and try to
figure out what that's doing so here's
my gradient descent update rule right
it's this equation and let's look at
what could happen if alpha is either too
small or if alpha is too large so in
this first example what happens if alpha
is too small so here's my function J J
of theta let's say I start here if alpha
is too small then what I'm going to do
is going to multiply my update by some
small number so I end up taking it looks
like a baby step like that ok so that's
one step reason then from this new point
I'm going to take another step but if
alpha is too small and take another
little baby step and so if
and so if my learning rate is too small
I'm going to end up you know taking
these tiny tiny baby steps to try to get
to the minimum and I'm going to need a
lot of steps to get to the minimum and
so if alpha is too small gradient
descent can be slow because it's going
to take these tiny tiny baby steps and
so it's going to need a lot of steps
before it gets any way close to the
global minimum now how about if alpha is
to launch so here's my function J of
theta turns out if alpha is too large
then gradient descent can overshoot the
minimum and may even fail to converge or
even diverge so here's what I mean let's
say a solid fatal there it's actually
pretty close to minimum so the
derivative points to the right but if
alpha is too big I'm going to take a
huge step maybe take a huge step like
that whereas I end up taking a huge step
and now my cost functions I've gotten
worse because I start off with this
value but now my values have gotten
worse now my derivative
you know points to the left is a section
decrease theta but my learning rate is
too big I may take a huge step going
from here all the way out there so we
end up going on there right and if my
learning is to Vega can't take another
huge step on the next iteration and kind
of overshoot and overshoot and so on
until yo you notice I'm actually getting
further and further away from the
minimum and so if alpha is too large
they can fail to converge or even
diverge now have another question for
you so this is a tricky one and when I
was first learning this stuff it
actually took me a long time to figure
this out one of your parameter theta one
is already at a local minimum what do
you think one step of gradient descent
will do
so let's suppose you initialize theta 1
add two local minimum so you know
suppose this is your initial value of
theta one over here and is already at a
local optimum and the local minimum it
turns out the local optimum your
derivative will be equal to zero so look
at that slope where is that tangent
point so the slope of this line will be
equal to zero and thus this derivative
term is equal to zero and so in your
gradient descent update you have theta
one gets updated as theta one minus
alpha times zero and so what this means
is that if you're already at the local
optimum and leaves theta one unchanged
because you know this updates theta one
equals the other one so if your
parameter is already at the local
minimum one step of gradient descent
does absolutely nothing it doesn't
change a parameter which is which is
what you want because it keeps your
solution at the local optimum this also
explains why gradient descent can
converge to local minimum even with the
learning rate alpha fixed here's what I
mean by that let's look at an example so
here's a cost function J of theta that
maybe I want to minimize and let's say I
initialize my algorithm my Granderson
algorithm you know out there at that
magenta point if I take one step of
gradient descent you know maybe it'll
take me to that point because my
director is pretty steep out there right
now I'm at this green point and if I
take another step of great descent you
notice that my derivative meaning the
slope is less steep at the green point
then compared to at the magenta point
out there right because as I approach
the minimum my derivative gets closer
and closer to zero as I approach the
minimum so often one step of grand
ascend my new derivative is a little bit
smaller so I want to take another step
of great descent
I will naturally take a somewhat smaller
step from the screen point that I get
from
magenta point now with a new point the
red point and then now even closer to
global minimum so the derivative here
will be even smaller than it was at a
green point so when I take another step
of green descent you know now my
derivative term is even smaller and so
the magnitude of the update to theta one
is even smaller so take a small step
like so and as gradient descent runs you
will automatically take smaller and
smaller steps until eventually you're
taking very small steps you know and you
finally converge to the - to the local
minimum so just a recap in gradient
descent as we approach a local minimum
gradient descent will automatically take
smaller steps and that's because as we
approach the local minimum by definition
local minimum is when you know this
derivative is equal to zero so as we
approach the local minimum this
derivative term will automatically get
smaller and so gradient descent will
automatically take smaller steps so this
is what we understand looks like and
then so actually no need to decrease
alpha over time so that's the gradient
descent algorithm and you can use it to
minimize to try to minimize any cost
function J not the cost function J that
we define for linear regression in the
next video we're going to take the
function J and set that back to be
exactly linear regressions cost function
the square cost function that we came up
with earlier and taking gradient descent
and the square cost function and putting
them together that will give us our
first learning algorithm they'll give us
our linear regression algorithm